The eye is an extremely complex organ comprising myriad structures that work together to provide the
sense of sifrreght. An understanding of the anatomy and physiology of the visual system provides eye care
professionals and staff with a valuable tool when meeting their patients’ needs and expectations.
This course is designed to provide eye care staff with a detailed, up-close look at the human eye, and
help transfer that knowledge to enhance their ability to provide quality care to patients.
VISION AND THE VISUAL SYSTEM
The task of the visual system is a big one: This system must process an almost infinite amount of
available information and extract only the bits that are useful. The brain gives different regions of the
visual field different priorities. The visual system seems to be a combination of several visual subsystems:
one dedicated to color, another to form, and a third to motion and depth.
The visual system is the part of the central nervous system that enables the human organism to see. By
interpreting the information from visible light, it builds a representation of the world surrounding the body.
White light is reflected off an object, enters the eye through the cornea, and proceeds down the visual
axis (line bisecting the eye) to the center of the retina, the fovea. The receptors in the retina convert this
light to electrons that are then transmitted to the visual cortex in the brain, where the image is “seen.”
THE GLOBE AND ITS TOPOGRAPHY
The globe of the eye, or bulbus oculi, is a bulb-like structure consisting of a wall enclosing a fluid-filled
cavity. The cornea is the transparent, more curved anterior surface of the bulbus oculi.
Embryology: Eyes develop in the fetus during the second week of pregnancy. The formation of the eye
is primarily a product of different cell growth rates, as well as cellular specialization as development takes
place. The optic cup predetermines the size and shape of the orbit. Postnatal growth of the orbit coincides
with growth of the globe. Eyelids start out fused together and separate between the fifth and the seventh
month. Most babies are hyperopic, or farsighted, at birth.
Dimensions, shape, and position: The anterior 1/6th-inch of the surface of the eyeball, known as the
window of the eye, is the clear, dome-shaped cornea. The remaining 5/6-inch is the white, opaque,
fibrous sclera. The center of the cornea is known as the anterior pole of the eye and opposite it, at the
back of the eye, is the posterior pole. The average axial length of the adult globe is 23.5 millimeters. This
equals the diameter from the outermost point of the cornea to the orbital fat behind the retina. The mature
cornea measures 12.0 millimeters across the diameter.
The geometric axis is an invisible line that bisects the eye exactly, anterior to posterior. The geometric
equator refers to the greatest circle around the eye, perpendicular to the geometric axis. The equator is
15 millimeters posterior to the corneal limbus, which is the juncture of the sclera, cornea and iris.
Divisions of the globe: The anterior segment is the front third of the eye and includes all structures in
front of the vitreous: the cornea, iris, ciliary body and lens. The two fluid-filled chambers within the anterior
segment are: The anterior chamber, which is the space between the posterior cornea (endothelium) and
the iris, and is filled with aqueous fluid. The posterior chamber is the area behind the iris and in front of
the vitreous face, and is filled with aqueous fluid. The aqueous in both anterior and posterior chambers
provides nutrients to the surrounding structures. The posterior segment is the posterior two-thirds of the
eye and includes the clear, jelly-like vitreous, the anterior hyaloid membrane of the vitreous, retina,
choroid, and optic nerve.
Eyelids are the flexible and mobile multilayer structures that cover the eye anteriorly. When the eyelids
are closed, they cover the globe. The primary function of the lids is to protect the eye from bright lights
and foreign objects. The blinking action also serves to protect the cornea from drying. The tear film is
spread over the surface of the eye at the rate of five times per minute. Blinking also aids in the tear flow
from the lacrimal glands and the aspiration of tears into the nasolacrimal system. Structures in the eyelid
contribute to the production of tear film.
The upper and lower eyelids connect nasally and temporally at the canthi to form an opening 30
millimeters wide and 10-12 millimeters high. Upper lids run from the upper lash line to the eyebrow. The
lower lid extends from the lower lash line to the upper cheek. The palpebral fissure is the space between
the lids when they are open and should be symmetrical between both eyes. When the eye is in the
primary position, the upper lid should lay on the superior corneal limbus while the lower lid rests on, or at
a millimeter below, the inferior corneal limbus.