air raid
An attack by planes dropping bombs.
air raid drill
Practice for what to do in air raid, such as going to the shelter.
air raid shelter
A building to protect people from bombs.
Allies
Countries including Britain, France, the Soviet Union and the USA who joined forces to fight the Axis Powers.
allotment
Small plot of land for growing vegetables.
atomic bomb
Weapon first used in 1945 when two bombs were dropped on Japan, killing more than 100,000 people.
Axis Powers
Germany, Japan, Italy and other countries that were allies in World War 2.
black out
War time ban on street lights and other lights at night.
Blitz
German air raids, from a German word blitzkrieg which means 'lightning war'.
British Empire
Countries ruled by Britain.
censorship
Controlling what people say or write.
civilians
People not in the armed forces.
Civil Defence
A network of civilian volunteers who assisted in the war effort by helping in air raids and rescuing people from bombed buildings.
Commonwealth
Group of friendly countries almost all of which were once part of the British Empire.
concentration camp
Prison where Jews and other prisoners were kept by the Nazis.













coupons
Slip of paper marked or torn out of a ration book.


D-Day
6 June 1944, the date Allied forces landed in Normandy, France.


department store
Large shop selling different things in different departments.


evacuee
Someone who was evacuated, moved from a danger area to a safer place.


factories
Places where things are made.

Forces
The Army, Royal Air Force, Royal Navy and other services.





Frank,Anne (1929-1945)
A German Jewish girl who spent two years hiding from the Nazis in a house in Holland. Her wartime diary was published after the war.



gas mask
Face mask to protect people against poison gas.


general election
Vote to choose Members of Parliament, and a new government.


gramophone
Machine for playing music records.



Hitler,Adolf (1929-1945)
Leader of Nazi Germany.


Holocaust
Mass murder of Jews and other people by the Nazis.




host family
People who took in evacuees to live with them.

invaded
Attacked and taken over by an enemy.

Jews
People who follow the religion of Judaism.

liberate
To free from an enemy's control.


military uniform
Clothing worn by soldiers, sailors and airmen.




naval
To do with the navy or warships.
naval battle
A fight between ships at sea.


Nazi
Short for National Socialist Party (in Germany), a follower of Hitler was also called a Nazi.




occupied
Taken over by enemy forces.


prime minister
Leader of the government of Britain.


prisoners of war
Soldiers captured by the other side.


propoganda
Controlling news media (such as radio) to show your side in the best way.

rationing
Controlling the supply of food, clothes, petrol and other things.



refugee
A person forced to leave their home, often by war.






register
A list of names. In WW2 people had to register with shops before they could use their ration books there.


Resistance
Fighting back in an occupied country, for example by refusing to help the enemy.

scrap metal
Waste metal such as old cooking pans.




siren
Machine that made a wailing noise as a warning when enemy planes were seen.



slogan
A catchy phrase or saying.




Soviet Union
Country made up of Russia and other states that are now independent.


steam train
A train pulled by a locomotive burning coal.



stirrup pump
Small hand pump for squirting water to put out fires.



telegram
A short message sent by phone, then printed out and delivered.




Underground
London's Tube rail system.


United Nations
Organization set up in 1945 by the Allies to work for world peace.




Vegetarians
People who don't eat meat.


war crime
Mass murder or cruel treatment of people during a war.









washboard
Wooden board with ridges, for scrubbing dirty clothes on.

